-01 changes (#4)
yaroslavros/connect-ip-optimizations: draft-rosomakho-masque-connect-ip-optimizations.md

Reviewer: Can we clarify that the length defines the length of the Segment Payload field, which is used to know when this segment ends? (That's what I assume at least)

Author: Done

---
title: "Reusable templates, derived fields, and checksum offload for HTTP Datagrams"

> abbrev: "Reusable templates, derived fields, and checksum offload for HTTP Datagrams"

Reviewer: This title is getting to be a doozy!

Would it be OK to call this compression?

```suggestion
title: "Extensions to Compress and Derive Fields in HTTP Datagrams"
abbrev: "HTTP Datagram Compression"
```

---
title: "Reusable templates, derived fields, and checksum offload for HTTP Datagrams"

> title: "Extensions to Compress and Derive Fields in HTTP Datagrams"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Extensions to Compress and Derive Fields in HTTP Datagrams"
```

--- abstract

> This document defines extensions for HTTP Datagram-based protocols that improve transmission efficiency by introducing reusable templates and derived field processing contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document defines extensions for HTTP Datagram-based protocols that improve transmission efficiency by introducing templates for compressing or deriving datagram fields.
```

Reusable templates allow endpoints to associate Context Identifiers with static portions of packet headers, enabling datagrams to remove repeated byte sequences while remaining stateless on the wire. Derived field processing allows receivers to reconstruct certain header fields such as packet lengths and complete checksums based on the size of the reconstructed packet.

> Additionally, this document defines a checksum offload procedure enabling receivers to complete checksums using sender-provided partial values.

Reviewer: These templates allow endpoints to define parts of datagrams that are static and can be removed, and other parts that can be derived (such as packet lengths and checksum values).

These optimisations reduce per-packet overhead, processing cost, and increase the effective maximum transmission unit (MTU) when datagrams are encapsulated in QUIC DATAGRAM frames.

--- middle

# Introduction

> The CONNECT-IP method {{!CONNECT-IP=RFC9484}} allows an HTTP client to establish an IP tunnel through an HTTP proxy and exchange IP packets using either HTTP/3 Datagrams specified in {{Section 2.1 of !HTTP-DATAGRAMS=RFC9297}} or DATAGRAM capsules specified in {{Section 3.5 of HTTP-DATAGRAMS}}. Similarly, CONNECT-ETHERNET {{!CONNECT-ETHERNET=I-D.ietf-masque-connect-ethernet}} allows carriage of Ethernet frames over HTTP Datagrams. In these protocols, each packet or frame is carried in full, including all transport and network headers, which provides simplicity and interoperability but incurs per-packet overhead due to the repeated transmission of largely invariant header fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CONNECT-IP method {{!CONNECT-IP=RFC9484}} allows an HTTP client to establish an IP tunnel through an HTTP proxy and exchange IP packets using either HTTP/3 Datagrams ({{Section 2.1 of !HTTP-DATAGRAMS=RFC9297}}) or DATAGRAM capsules ({{Section 3.5 of HTTP-DATAGRAMS}}). Similarly, CONNECT-ETHERNET {{!CONNECT-ETHERNET=I-D.ietf-masque-connect-ethernet}} allows sending Ethernet frames over HTTP Datagrams. These protocols send complete packets or frames by default, including all transport and network headers. This is a simple approach, but incurs per-packet overhead due to the repeated transmission of largely invariant header fields.
```

--- abstract

This document defines extensions for HTTP Datagram-based protocols that improve transmission efficiency by introducing templates for compressing or deriving datagram fields.

Reusable templates allow endpoints to associate Context Identifiers with static portions of packet headers, enabling datagrams to remove repeated byte sequences while remaining stateless on the wire. Derived field processing allows receivers to reconstruct certain header fields such as packet lengths and complete checksums based on the size of the reconstructed packet.

Additionally, this document defines a checksum offload procedure enabling receivers to complete checksums using sender-provided partial values.

> These optimisations reduce per-packet overhead, processing cost, and increase the effective maximum transmission unit (MTU) when datagrams are encapsulated in QUIC DATAGRAM frames.

Reviewer: Sorry, my comment had been messed up. I was suggesting shortening the whole abstract to be more abstract-like =) 
```suggestion
These templates allow endpoints to define parts of datagrams that are static and can be removed, and other parts that can be derived (such as packet lengths and checksum values).

Additionally, this document defines a checksum offload procedure enabling receivers to complete Internet checksums using sender-provided partial values.

These optimisations reduce per-packet overhead, processing cost, and increase the effective maximum transmission unit (MTU) when datagrams are encapsulated in QUIC DATAGRAM frames.
```

Author: I think it is worth keeping a mention of checksum offload. Checksum offload is neither template nor derived field. How about:

> These templates allow endpoints to define parts of datagrams that are static and can be removed, and other parts that can be derived (such as packet lengths and checksum values).
>
> Additionally, this document defines a checksum offload procedure enabling receivers to complete Internet checksums using sender-provided partial values.
>
> These optimisations reduce per-packet overhead, processing cost, and increase the effective maximum transmission unit (MTU) when datagrams are encapsulated in QUIC DATAGRAM frames.

Reviewer: Sold!

> Context Identifier (CID):

Reviewer: CID really makes me think of QUIC CIDs... probably better to just say Context ID?

Author: Sure. I'll update the text.

Author: Updated

Derived Field:

: A header field whose value is generated by the receiver during reconstruction and written into the reconstructed packet rather than being transmitted in the datagram payload. Derived fields include length fields and complete checksums.

Checksum Offload:

: A capability allowing the receiver to complete the Internet checksum according to {{!INCREMENTAL-CHECKSUM=RFC1624}} using a sender-provided partial checksum after reconstruction of the packet.

Capsule:

: A reliable control-stream message, as defined in {{Section 3 of HTTP-DATAGRAMS}}, used in this specification to signal creation, acknowledgement, or deletion of Processing Contexts.

# Negotiation of Capabilities {#negotiation}

Endpoints negotiate support for HTTP Datagram processing contexts during the HTTP request/response handshake by using the `http-datagram-contexts` HTTP header field, whose value is a Structured Field Dictionary as defined in {{Section 3.2 of !STRUCTURED-HTTP=RFC8941}}.

## Header Definition

~~~
http-datagram-contexts = sf-dictionary
~~~
{: #fig-http-datagram-contexts-header title="http-datagram-contexts header field"}

This document defines the following optional dictionary keys:

> `templates` (sf-dictionary):

Reviewer: I don't think you can have a dictionary within a dictionary in structured fields. Each value of a field is an Item or array; although these can parameterized

Reviewer: For these fields in "templates" it seems to me they could be top-level keys; `max-templates` and `max-template-segments`.

Author: Done. Please review.

: Indicates support for reusable templates. The dictionary contains:

* `max` (sf-integer, mandatory): maximum number of concurrently active template contexts the sender is willing to maintain for templates created by the peer. A value of 0 indicates that the endpoint does not accept templates from the peer but may use templates for its own transmissions.
* `segments` (sf-integer, optional): maximum number of static segments accepted within a single template.

> `derived` (sf-list):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`derived` (Inner List):
```

: A list of supported Derived Field Types as defined in {{iana-derived-fields}}.

> `checksum` (sf-boolean):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`checksum` (Boolean):
```

: Indicates support for the checksum offload procedure defined in this document. A value of ?1 means the endpoint is willing to complete checksums using sender-provided partial values. If omitted or set to ?0, checksum offload is not supported.

> `mtu` (sf-integer):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`mtu` (Integer):
```

Endpoints MAY transmit datagrams referencing contexts prior to receiving the *_ACK. A receiver MAY buffer datagrams referencing unknown Context IDs but MUST bound buffering by time and memory.

A receiver of an *_ACK capsule with an unknown Context ID or any data after Context ID MUST treat it as malformed and follow the error-handling procedure defined in {{Section 3.3 of HTTP-DATAGRAMS}}.

### Processing Context Closure {#close}

Processing Contexts are retired by sending corresponding *_CLOSE capsule. Closing a context implicitly closes all contexts that reference it directly or transitively.

A receiver of a *_CLOSE capsule SHOULD retain the closed context and its descendants for a short period to allow in-flight datagrams to arrive, but MUST bound the retention time and memory usage.

*_CLOSE capsules with unknown Context ID or any data after Context ID MUST be treated as malformed. Receiver of such capsules MUST follow the error-handling procedure defined in {{Section 3.3 of HTTP-DATAGRAMS}}.

## Template Capsules

### TEMPLATE_ASSIGN Capsule {#template-assign}

~~~

> TEMPLATE_ASSIGN Capsule {

Reviewer: Why "ASSIGN"? How about TEMPLATE_CREATE or TEMPLATE_DEFINE?

If any of the capsule fields are malformed upon reception, the receiver of the capsule MUST follow the error-handling procedure defined in {{Section 3.3 of HTTP-DATAGRAMS}}.

A receiver that has already accepted the maximum number of templates it advertised via the `max` member of `templates` in `http-datagram-contexts` MUST treat any additional TEMPLATE_ASSIGN capsule an error and MUST follow the same error-handling procedure.

Per-packet validation uses the reconstruction procedure described in {{reconstruction}}.

### TEMPLATE_ACK Capsule

~~~
TEMPLATE_ACK Capsule {
  Type (i) = 0x3ee31440,
  Length (i),
  Context ID (i),
}
~~~
{: #fig-template-ack-capsule title="TEMPLATE_ACK Capsule Format"}

Processing of the TEMPLATE_ACK capsule is described in {{ack}}

### TEMPLATE_CLOSE Capsule

~~~
TEMPLATE_CLOSE Capsule {
  Type (i) = 0x3ee31441,
  Length (i),
  Context ID (i),
}
~~~
{: #fig-template-close-capsule title="TEMPLATE_CLOSE Capsule Format"}

Processing of the TEMPLATE_CLOSE capsule is described in {{close}}

## Derived Field Capsules

### DERIVED_ASSIGN Capsule

~~~

> DERIVED_ASSIGN Capsule {

Reviewer: Same comment around ASSIGN. Maybe call this DERIVED_FIELD_*, like DERIVED_FIELD_DEFINE or DERIVED_FIELD_CREATE

Author: I thought it would be good to align terminology with draft-ietf-masque-connect-udp-listen.

Happy to use _CREATE or _DEFINE instead if that fits better in your opinion.

Reviewer: Agreed that matching makes sense. Ignore this comment!

  Type (i) = 0x3ee31442,

>   Length (i),

Reviewer: Does there need to be (or ought there to be) an offset field for the derived field? The checksum and static template fields have offsets, and it feels like it would be easier to know for sure where the various fields go if there is an offset?

I guess if one knows how the packet should be laid out, it will be possible to always know, but maybe that should be spelled out in the registry then?

Author: So far I cannot think of a practical use case when one knows how to calculate a derived field but does not know where to place it.
On top of that, many of currently specified derived fields do not have static offsets due to dynamic nature of some things such as IPv6 extension headers, IP options, etc.

Do you have any specific cases for derived fields that would require explicit offset specification?

Reviewer: That's a good point. I think what would be good (but can be added later) is to have examples and guidance of how to calculate where to put the various derived fields to make sure implementations have an easy time doing it correctly.

Author: Added https://github.com/yaroslavros/connect-ip-optimizations/issues/6 to track this.

~~~
http-datagram-contexts = templates=(max=1 segments=2), derived=(1), checksum=?1, mtu=1500
~~~
{: #fig-http-datagram-contexts-example-1 title="http-datagram-contexts response example"}

Since the proxy does not support TCP checksum derivation, but it supports checksum offloading, the client calculates checksum of IPv6 pseudo-header and places it in the TCP checksum field. Context for the offloaded checksum is defined using the CHECKSUM_ASSIGN capsule:

~~~
CHECKSUM_ASSIGN Capsule {
  Type (i) = 0x3ee31445,
  Length (i) = 4,
  Context ID (i) = 2,
  Next Context ID (i) = 0,
  Checksum Field Offset (i) = 56,
  Checksum Start Offset (i) = 40,
}
~~~
{: #ipv6-tcp-checksum-assign title="CHECKSUM_ASSIGN Capsule for example IPv6/TCP packet"}

Payload length field in IPv6 header can derived by the peer, so it is removed before calculating static segments. Resulting context for the derived field is defined using DERIVED_ASSIGN capsule:

~~~
DERIVED_ASSIGN Capsule {
  Type (i) = 0x3ee31442,
  Length (i) = 3,
  Context ID (i) = 4,
  Next Context ID (i) = 2,
  Derived Field Type (i) = 1
}
~~~
{: #ipv6-tcp-derived-assign title="DERIVED_ASSIGN Capsule for example IPv6/TCP packet"}

> Table below illustrates fields present in IPv6 and TCP headers after derived field was removed, their offsets in bits from the beginning of the packet and whether they are likely to be static for most packets of a given traffic flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below illustrates fields present in IPv6 and TCP headers after derived field was removed, their offsets in bits from the beginning of the packet and whether they are likely to be static for most packets of a given traffic flow
```
